---
layout: post
author: adam
title: MVWTF&#58; Demystifying Architecture Patterns
description: Breaking down the differences of various MV* patterns.
modified: 2019-08-15
published: true
tags: [architecture]
categories: [android]
---

As an Android developer, one of the questions I constantly see asked within the community is "what architecture pattern should I use?"

This discussion usually leads to a handful of buzzwordy acronyms:

* MVC
* MVP
* MVVM
* MVI
* MVU?? (We don't talk about this but apparently it's the new kid on the block)

This can be really intimidating to new Android devs, as well as seasoned veterans who are constantly questioning if they're using the right one. Whether you're trying to decide which one to learn, or wondering if the one you already use is best for you, this post will help lead you to the right decision. 

<!--more-->

We should first start off by understanding why we even need architecture patterns. When that question is asked, we get even more buzzwords, saying we want code that is:

* Maintainable
* Extensible
* Robust
* Testable

At face value, these may not sound like buzzwords, but are often just filler. What does it mean to write maintainable code anyways? The word robust means strong and healthy. What is strong and healthy code?

We're going to start at the beginning. Putting all of the buzzwords aside, we need to start with one single truth that is the basis for the rest of this post:

> You can't put all of your code in the Activity.

Implicitly we all know this, and we put our code into separate files. However, it's more than just putting various classes into their own file. How we decide to break apart our code is very important, and that process is what architecture patterns are for. An architecture pattern is the way of describing how you split up your code. 

Let's work through some options we have for splitting up our code by tackling the list of acronyms from the beginning, starting at the top. 